Proposal for Documentation Restructuring (#6628)
prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator: Documentation/proposals/202405-docs-restructuring.md

Incorporation of new topics is also difficult if the structure is not up to mark because more time and effort is needed to decide the best place to add a topic which can often lead to decrease in productivity of a maintainer. For example, in issue [#3553](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/3553#issuecomment-726733177), it has been mentioned that basic architecture needs to be worked upon before adding the diagram as there is no section talking about **“namespace selection”** in the current documentation.

# Goals

- To improve readability and make the documentation easier to understand.
- To ensure a uniform flow of content.
- To remove irrelevant information from the documentation.
- To ensure that all new features get documented properly in the future.

> # Audience

Reviewer: I probably get what you mean by "Developers and "Administrators" but it might be good to define the personas upfront.

- Developers who rely on Prometheus Operator to facilitate the deployment, management and monitoring of Prometheus instances in their environment.
- Developers who want to set up alerts for their application.
- Administrators who want to monitor Prometheus and Alertmanager instances using Kubernetes tools.
- Maintainers who are responsible for optimizing Prometheus Operator.
- Contributors who want to engage and want to contribute effectively to the project.

# Non-Goals

- Adding extra documentation about new features, enhancements, troubleshooting, or other information that might be missing today.

# How

I believe a basic structure for the website should be as given below:

### 1. Getting Started

> - **Introduction** - This section will introduce us to Prometheus-Operator and will talk about goals and the problems that are being solved by this project.

Reviewer: A small architecture diagram might be worth too. Nothing fancy but the basics of an operator should be covered.

> - **Installation Guide** - This section will contain all the methods of installation of Prometheus-Operator in the production environment.

Reviewer: We lack good production practices (e.g. RBAC "optimization")  but I also think that it should be easy to try the operator. Should we split into 1) the easy install method (but not to be applied for production as-is) and 2) the more elaborated install options and trade-offs?

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to have this kind of information in the "Admins" section?

- **Compatibility** - This section will provide information about compatibility of Prometheus-Operator with Kubernetes, Prometheus, Alertmanager and Thanos.

> - **Design** - This section will describe the design of Prometheus-Operator focusing on the various custom resource definitions(CRDs) it manages.

Reviewer: "Design" is a bit overloaded and I'm not sure that it's relevant for a Getting Started section?

Reviewer 2: @AshwinSriram11 please confirm this, but I think the intention was to move [this page](https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/operator/design/) somewhere, and this page looks relevant to all personas.

Author: We discussed to move the Design page to the "Getting Started" section.The reason behind this was that after installation, a user can get information about all the CRDs offered by Prometheus-Operator before moving on to "how to use them". Since it is relevant to all persona and is a one page overview, this is why I thought it should be in the "Getting Started" section.

Reviewer: Comparing the terse [description](https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/operator/api/#monitoring.coreos.com/v1.Prometheus) of the Prometheus CRD with the [longer one](https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/operator/design/#prometheus) from the Design page, I don't see why we would not copy the latter to the Go code?

### 2. API Reference

This section will provide detailed information about different fields of the Custom Resources in Prometheus-Operator(config, spec, status and other information).

> ### 3. User Guide

Reviewer 2: I'm not 100% sure about the name "User Guide" for this section, it doesn't seem to reflect very well with the content planned to be here... I can't find a better name though 😅

Author: Maybe "Developers Guide" would be a more suitable name.

### 4. Administrator Guide

This section will provide deeper insights for administrators who want to set up a robust, secure monitoring infrastructure.

### 5. Community

- **Contributing**
- **Testing**
- **DCO**
- **License**
- **Code of Conduct**
- **Release**
- **Adopters**

The reasoning behind the new structure is given below -

- The **“Getting-Started”** section should only serve information on how to begin your journey with the project. So, the first thing that comes to mind should be a basic overview followed by the installation. It won’t make sense to have the installation section appear in the User-Guide(in the current model) because installation is the foremost important thing to begin working on a project. With installation, users would also like to know the different releases and their compatibility, thus it makes more sense to add this topic just below the installation section. At last, Design doc should be present to give an overview of how different components interact and what their purpose is in a concise manner.

> - API Reference is of extreme importance and is something needed by developers to implement the functionalities they need. It is something needed by both a **User** and an **Administrator**. As it is common for both personas, I think rather than duplicating this page in both sections, we should have a separate section for it due to its relevance. Further, looking at the current API reference page, it contains too much information for a single page. This makes the page look overly crowded and searching for any particular field becomes a tedious task. We can convert this page into multiple pages by grouping sections and cross-reference properly which will provide a better experience for a user.

Reviewer: I could see 1 page per CRD.

Author: I think we can first categorise by different packages then we can move on to different pages for different CRDs for each package.

- I felt that User-Guide is placed before Administrator-Guide keeping in mind about the difficulties a newcomer faces when he/she starts working on a project. User-Guide contains beginner friendly examples and provides a beginner level experience. The topics discussed are mostly centered around how to work with different CRDs. But when we move on to the Administrator-Guide, we will find more advanced situations like security, storage which would be difficult to understand if a person is not able to cope up with basic concepts of different CRDs.
  Thus, this structure provides a uniform flow with context to difficulty level for a newcomer as well as segregates relevant information according to the persona.

> - As mentioned in the audience, we also have people who want to contribute to the project. So, making a **“Community”** section serves the purpose of providing users to find how to contribute to the project. Also, it provides other community related information like release, adopters, and other topics which are not provided in the current model.

Reviewer: +1 to this: more details about how to contribute is highly needed.

- We should remove the Kube-Prometheus section in the current model. We can mention the method of deploying Prometheus-Operator with Kube-Prometheus in the installation section due to its ease and popularity among users. But, as the helm-charts are not being maintained by Prometheus-Operator and have now been moved to Kube-Prometheus-Stack, it becomes difficult to manage and address the issues regarding Kube-Prometheus.

> - To make the organization of documentation better according to the new structure and to keep things in sync with the **prometheus-operator/website** repository, we should reorganize the folders as they are in the **website** repository. This will make it easier to work with both the repositories for a contributor and will help in better organization. This will also make it easier to locate the file in which changes are needed to be made.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- To make the documentation organization better according to the new structure and keep things in sync with the **prometheus-operator/website** repository, we should reorganize the folders as they are in the **website** repository. This will make it easier to work with both the repositories for a contributor and will help in better organization. This will also make it easier to locate the file in which changes need to be made.
```
